---
layout: page-template
permalink: /quotes/
---
Leo Strauss
>“The belief in progress must be qualified with a view to the fact that human nature does not change.”

The Moral Equivalent of War
>Dr. Steinmetz is a conscientious thinker, and his book, short as it is, takes much into account. Its upshot can, it seems to me, be summed up in Simon Patten's words, that mankind was nursed in pain and fear, and that the transition to a "pleasure economy" may be fatal to a being wielding no powers of defence against its degenerative influences. If we speak of the fear of emancipation from the fear-regime, we put the whole situation into a single phrase; fear regarding ourselves now taking the place of the ancient fear of the
enemy.

>All these beliefs of mine put me squarely into the anti-militarist party. But I do not believe that peace either ought to be or will be permanent on this globe, unless the states pacifically organized preserve some of the old elements of army-discipline. A permanently successful peace-economy can not be a simple pleasure-economy. In the more or less socialistic future towards which mankind seems drifting we must still subject ourselves collectively to those severities which answer to our real position upon this only partly hospitable globe. We must make new energies and hardihoods continue the manliness to which the military mind so faithfully clings. Martial virtues must be the enduring cement; intrepidity, contempt of softness, surrender of private interest, obedience to command, must still remain the rock upon which states are built-unless, indeed, we wish for dangerous reactions against commonwealths fit only for contempt, and liable to invite attack whenever a center of crystallization for military-minded enterprise gets formed anywhere in their neighborhood.

The Virtue of Nationalism

>This competition among independent states explains the fact that those periods of history that we find most admirable in terms of the kinds of individuals they produced, and their fruitfulness in terms of works of science, religion, and art, were periods in which the political order was one of small, independent states in competition with one another, whether national states or tribal city-states. One thinks of ancient Greece and Israel, as well as of the Italian states of the Renaissance and the national states after the Protestant construction of Europe, especially the Netherlands, England, France, and the German states of central Europe. This has been noticed by a long line of empiricist philosophers, among them John Stuart Mill, who attributes Europe's progress to the "plurality of paths" that its political order has allowed:
<i>"What has made the European family of nations an improving, instead of a stationary, portion of mankind? Not of any superior excellence in them-which, when it exists,
exiss as the efect, not the cause but their remarkable
diversiy of culture Individuals, classes, nations, have been
extremely unlike one another. They have struck out a great variety of paths, each leading to something valuabe. And although at every period they have been intolerant of one another, and each would have thought it an excellent thing if all the rest could have been compelled to travel his road, ... each has in time endured to receive the good which the others have offered. Europe is ... wholly indebted to this plurality of paths."</i>
We cannot pass over the fact that so very great a proportion of the heritage of mankind has been the product of systems of independent states, whereas the contribution of imperial states has been, in comparison, strikingly sparse. An era of competition in an order of independent national states or city-states seems to offer the greatest opportunities to individuals of ability who can bring advantage to the national state or city-state.
The imperial state naturally promotes an altogether different environment, ultimately offering a man of ability but one opportunity: to mold himself to the desires of the one great political power that is the empire. And this kind of opportunity, it seems, comes to little when compared with the flourishing that is possible under an order of independent national or tribal states, each jealous of its own health and prosperity, its own strength and reputation. (p. 132/33)

>Since the decision as to which objectives can be better achieved by the federal European government is in the hands of the officials of this government itself, there is no barrier to the constant reduction of the authority of the member national states other than the self-restraint of these same officials. This restraint has not, however, been forthcoming, and the EU bureaucracy, backed by federal European courts, has consistently extended its powers over member nations in areas such as economic policy, labor and employment policy, public health, communications, education, transportation, the environment, and urban plan-ning. The European principle of subsidiarity is thus nothing other than a euphemism for empire: The subsidiary nations of Europe are only independent insofar as the European government decides that they will be independent."9
The obviously imperial character of the European federal government has been consistently obscured, however, by claims that the European Union has discovered a new "transnational" hat the European Union has discovered a new "transnational" form of politcal order, to which the traditional categories used to describe political institutions can no longer be applied. (p.152)

>The European nations are, as everyone understands, dominated by Germany. The European Union is a German imperial state in all but name. However, as long as Germany seeks to avoid building up its military and taking responsibility for the security of the continent, the EU will apparently remain an American protectorate -- a protectorate that is also an empire in its own right. Should the United States ever withdraw its protection, all the talk of Europeans pioneering a new form of political order will quickly evaporate. At that time, a strong European executive will be appointed by Germany and empowered to maintain the security of the continent. Then the reconstitution of the medieval German empire in Europe will be complete, and the English-inspired experiment with an order of independent national states in Europe will have reached its end.

>The truth, then, is that there is no "federal solution" that can allow us to evade the choice between an imperial order and an order of independent nations. An international federal government is nothing other than an imperial govern-ment—and this is so whether one prefers to look to American or European precedents. Any international federation will be ruled by officials with views of their own as to the appropriate limits that are to be placed on the self-determination of subject nations. No founding documents, no matter how well crafted, can stand over time as an effective barrier against the views of these officials. For it is they who have the authority to interpret these documents and thus to determine the course of affairs. They will interpret, ignore, or alter any documents in light of their own understanding of what is required for the health and prosperity of the imperial state—which they will inevitably, and in accordance with long-standing tradition, identify with the health and prosperity of mankind as a whole.

One World
>Freedom or self-government, talked about in the context of the Middle East, is too absolute a concept to be useful to an American. On the one hand, people who are against it point to the chaos and confusion which would result if all these peoples were suddenly left free to rule themselves. On the other hand, people who are for it paint too black a picture of Western influence in the Middle East, describing it as sheer imperialist exploitation and forgetting the very real gains which have come with French and British and American commercial expansion there.
The pragmatic, realistic truth lies in the middle. I found only very few Arabs or Jews or Egyptians or Iranians who wanted the West to get out lock, stock, and barrel, and at once. (p. 41)

> How does your pay as superintendent of this factory compare with that of the average skilled worker in the plant?" I asked him.
He thought for a moment: "It's about ten times as much."
That would be on the same ratio twenty-five or thirty thousand dollars a year in America, and actually was about what a man of similar responsibility in America would receive. So I said to him, "I thought Communism meant equality of reward."
Equality, he told me, was not part of the present Soviet conception of socialism. "From each according to his capacities, to each according to his work," was the slogan of Stalinist socialism, he explained, and only when they had achieved the Communist phase of their development would the slogan be changed to "From each according to his capacities, to each according to his needs." Even then, he added, complete equality would not be necessary or desirable.(p. 86)

>I asked him, just to see what his answer would be, "Why don't you invest it in something that will give you a good return?" He looked at me in surprise and, I thought, even with a slight air of superiority. "You mean, Mr. Willkie, to get return on capital? That isn't possible in Russia, and anyhow I don't believe in it."
I tried to get him to tell me why, and for ten minutes I found myself listening to Marxist and Leninist theories which I finally interrupted with the question:
"Well, what does cause you to work so hard?"
He answered, sweeping his arm about him as he spoke, "I run this factory.
Someday I'll be the director. Do you see these badges?" pointing to a string of decorations pinned on his blouse. "Those were given to me by the party and the government because I was good." He spoke with frank cockiness. "Some-day, if I'm good enough, the party will give me something to do with running the government."
"But who will take care of you when you are an old man?"
"T'll have some cash put aside, and if I don't have enough, the government will provide for me."
"Don't you ever have a desire to own a plant of your own?" I asked.
To which he replied with another deluge of Marxian economic and social philosophy with which he was as familiar as with the working of his plant.
"Well, how about your family?" I persisted. "Don't you want your children to have a better start than you had? Don't you want to protect your wife in case you go before she does?"
He said impatiently, "That's mere capitalistic talk, Mr. Willkie. I started as a worker. My children will have as good a start as I had. My wife works now, and as long as she's well she'll continue to work. When she's unable to do so, the state will take care of her."
"Well," I said, "what happens to you if you don't make good in this job?" And he said with a grim smile, "I'll be liquidated." I knew that might mean anything from demotion to death itself. (p. 87)

>I don't know the answers to all the questions about Russia, but there's one other thing I know: that such a force, such a power, such a people cannot be ignored or disposed of with a high hat or a lifting of the skirt. We cannot act as if we were housewives going into an A & P store, picking and choosing among the groceries displayed; taking this, leaving that. The plain fact is: we have no choice in the matter. Russia will be reckoned with. That is the reason why I am constantly telling my fellow Americans: work in ever-closer co-operation with the Russians while we are joined together in the common purpose of de- feating a common enemy. Learn all we can about them and let them learn about us.
There's still another thing I know: geographically, from a trade standpoint, in their similarity of approach to many problems, the Russians and the Americans should get along together. The industrialization of Russia will require limitless amounts of American products, and Russia has unlimited natural sources that we need. The Russians, like us, are a hardy, direct people and have great admiration for everything in America, except the capitalistic system. And, frankly, there are many things in Russia that we can admire--its vigor, its vast dreams, its energy, its tenacity of purpose. No one could be more opposed to the Communist doctrine than I am, for I am completely opposed to any system that leads to absolutism. But I have never understood why it should be assumed that in any possible contact between Communism and democracy, democracy should go down. (p. 126)

>So let me say once more: I believe it is possible for Russia and America, perhaps the most powerful countries in the world, to work together for the economic welfare and the peace of the world. At least, knowing that there can be no enduring peace, no economic stability, unless the two work together, there is nothing I ever wanted more to believe. And so deep is my faith in the fundamental rightness of our free economic and political institutions that I am convinced they will survive any such working together. (p. 126/27)

>While we were absorbed in our bitter quarrels and isolationist delusions, we never took time to understand the heroic role that the Chinese were playing, let alone to send them substantial help. Now we are in a great war to retrieve that error. We must retrieve it.
The Chinese outlook on the future is almost the opposite of that of the Japa- nese. They do not seek empire. They seek merely to hold and to develop their own vast and lovely homeland. They want to see the new forces that are stirring in the East used for their own freedom and for the freedom of other peoples. Meanwhile the Japanese seek to use the same forces for their imperialistic de- signs.
China is much larger than the United States, both in area and in population. It contains within its boundaries many rich resources. On the other hand, it is not self-sufficient--and neither are we. This fact does not disturb the Chinese or make them want to conquer the world, any more than it does us. Self- sufficiency is a delusion of the totalitarians. In a truly democratic world, a nation would have no more need of self-sufficiency than the state of New York has of making itself independent of the state of Pennsylvania. (p. 135)

>I left China somewhat baffled by its present economic and inflationary problems. Obviously its inflation would have long since been disastrous, measured in terms of a money economy, and yet financial disaster never quite comes to China. One has a feeling, however, that it's just around the proverbial corner and has been for a long (p.191)

>When you fly around the world in forty-nine days, you learn that the world has become small not only on the map, but also in the minds of men. All around the world, there are some ideas which millions and millions of men hold in common, almost as much as if they lived in the same town. One of these ideas, and one which I can report without hesitation, has tremendous significance for us in America; it is the mixture of respect and hope with which the world looks to this country. (...) They, each and every one, turn to the United States with a friendliness that is often akin to genuine affection. I came home certain of one clear and significant fact: that there exists in the world today a gigantic reservoir of good will toward us, the American people.
Many things have created this enormous reservoir. At the top of the list go the hos-pitals, schools, and colleges which Americans
-missionaries, teachers, and doctors have founded in the far corners of the world. Many of the new leaders of old countries-men who are today running Iraq or Turkey or China-have studied under American teachers whose only interest has been to spread knowledge.


>I found this dread of foreign control every-where. The fact that we are not associated with it in men's minds has caused people to go much farther in their approval of us than I had dared to imagine. I was amazed to discover how keenly the world is aware of the fact that we do not seek—anywhere, in any region—to impose our rule upon others or to exact special privileges.
All the people of the earth know that we have no sinister designs upon them, that even when we have in the past withdrawn from international affairs into a false self-sufficiency, it was without sinister purpose. And they know that, now we are in this war, we are not fighting for profit, or loot, or territory, or mandatory power over the lives or the governments of other people. That, I think, is the single most important reason for the existence of our reservoir of good will around the world.

>Neither Hitler nor Mussolini nor Hirohito, with their propaganda or by their arms, can take from us the unifying force of this good will—and there is no other such unifying force in the world—or divide us among ourselves or from our allies, as long as we do not make a mockery of our protestations of the ideals for which we have proclaimed we fight.
A policy of expediency will prove inexpedient. For it will lose us the invaluable spiritual and practical assets that come from the faith of the people of the world in both our ideals and our methods.
If we permit ourselves to become involved in the machinations of Old World intrigue and religious, nationalistic and racial blocs, we will find ourselves amateurs indeed. If we stand true to our basic principles, then we shall find ourselves professionals of the kind of world toward which men in every part of it are aspiring.

>For, however important the role of bayonets and guns may have been in the development of mankind, the role of ideas has been vastly more important—and, in the long run, more conclusive. In historical times, at any rate, men have not often fought merely for the joy of killing each other. They have fought for a purpose. Sometimes that purpose has not been very inspiring. Sometimes it has been quite selfish. But a war won without a purpose is a war won without victory.
A most outstanding example of a war fought with a purpose was our own American Revolution. We did not fight the Revolution because we hated Englishmen and wanted to kill them, but because we loved freedom and wanted to establish it. I think it is fair to say, in the light of what that freedom has meant to the world, that the victory at Yorktown was the greatest victory ever. (...) (p.203)
>Our leaders, jointly and singly, have expressed some of our common aspirations. One of the finest expressions came from Chiang Kai-shek in a message to the Western world, delivered through the New York Herald Tribune Forum on Current Events in New York City last November. He concluded:
"China has no desire to replace Western imperialism in Asia with an Oriental imperialism or isolationism of its own or of anyone else.
We hold that we must advance from the narrow idea of exclusive alliances and regional blocs, which in the end make for bigger and better wars, to effective organization of world unity. Unless real world co-operation replaces both isolationism and imperialism of whatever form in the new interdependent world of free nations, there will be no lasting security for you or for us."

>Add to this Stalin's statement of purpose, which I quoted earlier, a statement on November 6, 1942, on the occasion of the twenty-fifth anniversary of the October Revolution. It is a singularly explicit and exact statement:
<i>"Abolition of racial exclusiveness, equality of nations and integrity of their territories, liberation of enslaved nations and restoration of their sovereign rights, the right of every nation to arrange its affairs as it wishes, economic aid to nations that have suffered and assistance to them in attaining their material welfare, restoration of democratic liberties, the destruction of the Hitlerite regime."</i>

>The statement of Mr. Stalin and the Atlantic Charter seem to me to have a common fallacy. They forecast the re-creation of western Europe in its old divisions of small nations, each with its own individual political, economic, and military sovereignty. It was this outmoded system that caused millions in Europe to be captivated by Hitler's proposed new order. For even with Hitler tyranny they at least saw the hope of the creation of an area large enough so that the economics of the modern world could successfully function.
They had come to realize through bitter experience that the restricted areas of trade imposed by the high walls of a multitude of individual nationalisms, with the consequent manipulations of power politics, made impoverishment and war inevitable.
The re-creation of the small countries of Europe as political units, yes; their re-creation as economic and military units, no, if we really hope to bring stabilization to western Europe both for its own benefit and for the peace and economic security of the world.
The statement of the Generalissimo, the declaration of Mr. Stalin, the provisions of the Atlantic Charter, and the enunciation of the Four Freedoms are nevertheless each and all signs of great progress and have aroused high hopes around the world.

>Exactly the reverse is true. Sincere efforts to find progressive solutions now will bring strength to our cause.
Remember, opponents of social change always urge delay because of some present crisis.
After the war, the changes may be too little and too late.
We must develop between nations trade and trade routes strong enough to give all peoples the same vested interest in peace which we in America have had.

>America must choose one of three courses after this war: narrow nationalism, which inevitably means the ultimate loss of our own liberty; international imperialism, which means the sacrifice of some other nation's liberty; or the creation of a world in which there shall be an equality of opportunity for every race and every nation. I am convinced the American people will choose, by overwhelming majority, the last of these courses.
To make this choice effective, we must win not only the war, but also the peace, and we must start winning it now.



“Tradition means giving a vote to most obscure of all classes, our ancestors. It is the democracy of the dead. Tradition refuses to submit to the small and arrogant oligarchy of those who merely happen to be walking about. All democrats object to men being disqualified by the accident of birth; tradition objects to their being disqualified by the accident of death. Democracy tells us not to neglect a good man’s opinion, even if he is our groom; tradition asks us not to neglect a good man’s opinion, even if he is our father.”

— G.K. Chesterton, Orthodoxy
